Machine Learning for Metabolomics Assignment Planning and Design1. data prep & exploration [15marks]1.1 Summary:1.1.1 Data preparation and exploration involves several key steps:1.1.2 Quality Control (QC) is performed to ensure data integrity1.1.3 Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and other visualization techniques are used to explore data and assess the impact of pre-treatments.1.1.4 Normalization is applied to the data, followed by outlier and batch effect management to ensure reliable clustering analysis related to treatments, batches, and storage durations.1.2 Process Flow1.2.1 Data: DCA Year 1, DCA Year 2, DCA Year 31.2.2 Perform QC1.2.3 Use PCA and other suitable visualization techniques to explore the data and decide if the pre-treatments have any effect.1.2.4 Perform data pre-treatment to normalize the data1.2.5 Manage outliers1.2.6 Manage batch effects1.2.7 Comment on the clustering of the data in relation to different treatments, batches and storage duration2. objective 1 [35 marks]2.1 Summary:2.1.1 Objective 1 involves using Random Forest models to predict apple storage and ripening stages by partitioning datasets with createTimeSlices() and applying scaling and grid search for tuning. 2.1.2 Key steps include: * Building classification models using physicochemical data from Year 1 and Year* Comparing models and selecting the best based on confusion matrices and other metrics* Identifying important features and providing biological interpretations. 2.1.3 The process is repeated by training on Year 2 and testing on Year 1 to evaluate performance differences.2.2 Process Flow2.2.1 Use the apple physicochemical data from the DCA trial Year 1 and Year 2.2.2.2 You will use the data from Year1 to train and optimize the classification model and the data from Year2 to validate its performance2.2.3 given an apple with these characteristics, what stage of development is it in...2.2.4 Build different "classification" models for predicting storage and ripening stage* Random Forest: You can use the createTimeSlices() function from caret to partition the dataset according to the timepoint they belong to.* Random Forest with Multivariate Longitudinal Predictors. The R package DynForest is designed to address timeseries. The class you can try to predict can be “Storage week” and “Ripeness Stage” and comment on which provides better results2.2.5 Apply scaling if required grid search for model tuning2.2.6 For each algorithm you are required to build 2 models for different data partitions and to compare the total performance of the two algorithms for the models developed2.2.7 Compare models and justify your choice of best model, Create confusion matrices and report any other relevant performance metrics2.2.8 repeat the process above, but this time use Year2 to train and optimize the model and Year1 as test set.2.2.9 summarise the most important features (variables) identified by the model and try to provide a biological interpretation of the results.3. objective 2 [35 marks]3.1 Summary:3.1.1 Objective: Analyze apple physicochemical data to differentiate between DCA and CA treatments using multivariate time-series classifiers.3.1.2 Model Training: Utilize Year1 data for training and optimization, and Year2 for testing; repeat with reversed datasets.3.1.3 Evaluation: Implement Random Forest with RCatch22 for feature extraction, evaluate using confusion matrices, and interpret biologically meaningful features.3.2 Use the apple physicochemical data from Year 2 to be able to differentiate between samples belonging to DCA vs CA treatment.3.3 use data from Year1 for training and optimising the model and Year2 for testing.3.4 given an apple with these characteristics, what treatment condition was it stored in3.5 build multivariate timeseries classifiers for each treatment. For each algorithm you are required to build 10 models for different data partitions3.5.1 CA:* Random Forest with feature extraction with RCatch22 package to transform the features (variables) into 22 interpretable feature vectors. Extract importance scores for the original features and attempt biologically meaningful interpretations* An algorithm of your choice suitable for time-series3.5.2 DCA:* Random Forest with feature extraction with RCatch22 package to transform the features (variables) into 22 interpretable feature vectors. Extract importance scores for the original features and attempt biologically meaningful interpretations* An algorithm of your choice suitable for time-series3.5.3 Use the test set to evaluate the prediction accuracy of the models. Present the results using a confusion matrix and other performance metrics and comment on the model’s performance3.5.4  repeat the process above, but this time use Year2 to train and optimise the model and Year1 as test set.3.5.5 summarise the most important features (variables) identified by the model and try to provide a biological interpretation of the results.